politics

Trump and Kim downplay expectations as key summit talks begin 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-offers-public-embrace-of-kim-jong-un-hours-before-summit-begins/2019/02/27/8ae731c4-3a4a-11e9-a2cd-307b06d0257b_story.html

By  David Nakamura and          David Nakamura Reporter covering the White House  Email  Bio  Follow         Simon Denyer          Simon Denyer Tokyo bureau chief covering Japan, North Korea and South Korea.   Email  Bio  Follow         February 27   HANOI — President Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un downplayed expectations of a deal to dismantle that country’s nuclear weapons Thursday, as they kicked off the second day of a two-day summit here.  Kim, however, said he was ready to denuclearize. “If I’m not willing to do that, I wouldn’t be here right now,” he said through an interpreter. Sitting beside Kim on Thursday morning, Trump said the pair had enjoyed very good discussions over dinner the night before, with “a lot of great ideas being thrown about,” adding that “importantly, I think the relationship is, you know, just very strong.” “And when you have a good relationship, a lot of good things happen. So, I can’t speak necessarily for today, but I can say this that, a little bit longer-term, and over a period of time, I know we’re going to have a fantastic success with respect to Chairman Kim and North Korea.” Trump repeatedly stressed there was “no rush” to make a deal. “Chairman Kim and myself, we want to do the right deal. Speed is not important,” he said. Both Kim and Trump also said they would welcome the idea of opening a U.S. liaison office in the North Korean capital. Washington does not have direct diplomatic representation in Pyongyang.   
     
           Asked if he was confident the pair would reach a deal, Kim was equally guarded.  “It’s too early to tell. I won’t prejudge,” Kim said in reply to the question from a Washington Post reporter, a rare response from a North Korean leader to an independent journalist. “From what I feel right now, I do have a feeling that good results will come.” Kim also said the whole world was watching them. “There would be people welcoming, and people viewing our meeting with skepticism, but there would also be people who would look at us spending a great time together, like a scene in a fantasy movie,” he said. On Wednesday night, Trump offered a public embrace of Kim, referring to the authoritarian ruler as “my friend” and stating that he is “satisfied” with the progress of their negotiations.        1 of 39

